# Carcasses and excrement

Carcasses and excrement are both key resources for animal consumption. For this reason,
we track the abundance of each of these resources. As carcasses and excrement are also
generated by animals they need to be tracked at a fine temporal scale. At present the
litter model exchanges information with the animal model on a monthly time step, so if
carcasses were tracked there scavenger responses would show a significant lag (e.g. an
elephant dies, but scavengers only start responding a month later). To avoid these lags,
excrement and carcass dynamics are therefore tracked in the animal model.

In each grid square the total abundance of excrement and carcasses are tracked. At
present, we only have one class of carcasses, but this may well be split into separate
size classes at some point in the future. The nitrogen and phosphorus stoichiometry of
each pool is also tracked.

For each pool the total abundance is split between a "scavengable" fraction (which
animals can consume) and a "decayed" fraction (which gets added to the soil model at the
next time step). When biomass is added to either pool it gets split between these two
fractions. The relative allocation to the "scavengable" fraction is determined by the
following equation

$$f_c = d / (s + d),$$

where $d$ is the rate at which the resource decays due to microbial activity and $s$ is
the rate at which animals discover and remove the resource. At present, both of these
rates are (empirically derived) constants. Scavenging rate ($s$) could be determined
dynamically from the animal model but this would introduce parameterisation complexities
that we don't want to tackle at present. We definitely do not want to simulate microbial
decay processes within the animal model, but in future we could allow the microbial
decay rate ($d$) to vary based on key environmental parameters (e.g. temperature).
